# Voyage to China

By R. Stevens

It was a gray afternoon in early October 1944 when we prepared to board ship for
Japan. The gloomy weather and the ugly little freighter prepared to receive us
were depressing enough but the sound of air-raid sirens brought back only too
vividly the events of ten days previously as we sat on our gear at the seaward
end of Pier Seven, Manila’s largest and longest. A month earlier we, survivors
of Bataan and Corregidor, had been brought into Manila and lodged at Bilibid
Prison where we had existed on a diet of two rather skimpy meals a day. It
wasn’t until September 21st that some of our group had managed to wrangle spots
on an outside work detail where there was always the possibility of scrounging
extra food - either by outright thievery or by the help of the ever-obliging
Filipinos.

That day it was bright and sunny as some twenty of us stood outside the prison
gates waiting to board a truck. Japanese airplanes, some towing practice
anti-craft sleeves, maneuvered in the air above us while anti-aircraft, located
in and around the city, shot at the sleeves. Soon a gradually increasing humming
noise came to our ears and turning towards the northeast we saw what seemed to
us an infinite number of small black aircraft approaching the city. The Japanese
guards smiled proudly at this mighty display of Nipponese power, but their
smiles turned to hysteria as the intruders started to chase and shoot down the
Japanese airplanes playing around overhead and as the air-mid sirens suddenly
began to wail.

Hastily we were shoved back into the prison where some of us were able to obtain
vantage points on the roofs of the old concrete prison buildings to see the
show. And what a show it was after 2-1/2 years of prison camp. First, everything
wearing the Rising Sun departed the skies, generally in flames. Next, the
airfields in the .vicinity were attacked, then the dock area and the ships in
port. That afternoon the black airplanes were back, concentrating again on the
dock area and shipping. Throughout the night ammunition and fuel exploded
continuously and the next morning the third and final attack took place.

Through the grapevine we thought we were pretty well informed of the tremendous
damage done, but we did not fully appreciate it until we were marched through
the port area and out onto Pier Seven a day or so later. Collapsed and
smoldering warehouses, streets full of bomb craters and numerous sunken but
partly exposed ships in the harbor convinced us that we were in a poor tactical
position. So, when the sirens sounded, it looked like a question of who was
going to break and run first, the prisoners or the guards. However, after some
30 minutes of stomach-churning anxiety the "all clear" sounded and the orderly
loading of the ship began - 600 prisoners in hold No. 1 on top of loose coal and
1205 in the tween-decks of hold No. 2 with the remaining hold (No.3), which had
no tween-decks, being left empty.

Hold No. 2. tween-decks had apparently been fitted out for troop transport
because the area under the hatch had been left clear while the sections under
the deck had been divided into three tiers each with about 3-1/2 feet of
vertical clearance. Thus it was not quite possible for a normal-sized American
to sit large number of bodies which filled not only the three tiers on each side
of the vessel but also the covered-over hatch to the lower hold.

I and my particular group of seven found ourselves in the lower tier on the port
side. against the side of the ship and close to the bulkhead separating the No.
2 and No. 3 holds. Two-and-a-half years of prison camp, where approximately half
of us had died, had left the remainder a fairly tough and resourceful lot.
Everything we owned was carried in sea-bags on our backs. So as to make more
room, we suspended these bags by ropes part way down into the lower hold from
where they could be raised if anything was needed but could not be pilfered by
anybody going into the lower hold. Inside the prisoners’ holds the atmosphere
was almost suffocating what with the humid, tropical climate, the lack of
ventilation and the congestion of bodies. At first the hatch covers were left in
place but as the cruise progressed, the Japanese relented and gradually removed
them which helped some but not a great deal. The only means of egress from our
hold was a single, vertical iron ladder and both hatches were covered by machine
guns mounted on the bridge. Soon everybody stripped to shorts or Japanese
g-strings to try to be as comfortable as possible.

In this fashion we steamed out of Manila Bay and headed southwest with the
navigators below decks, using compasses and estimated speed, plotting our course
as avidly as the officers on the bridge. Sometime the next afternoon we reached
a sheltered bay, which we estimated to be just northeast of Palawan Island, and
dropped anchor. Here we lay for about ten days and here our troubles really
began. While under way there was, at least, some movement of air in the hold but
at anchor in a protected bay there was none. During the day the sun-side of the
ship grew too hot to touch and radiated a tremendous amount of heat. Food
consisted of one small ration per day of a mixture of rice and barley, but the
real problem was water, or rather the lack of it. Obviously the ship carried
little stocks and the only available for crew, guards and prisoners, in that
order, was from the ship's condensers. Sometimes we got a canteen cupful every
three days, sometimes every four. Equitable distribution was almost impossible
and gradually the law of the Jungle took over. Some minds snapped while others
sank into complete lethargy. Tempers grew short and fights common between men
hardly able to move. Sanitation consisted of two 5-ga11on cans for 1205 men and
was an unholy mess even though there was little to eliminate. Some of us had
vitamin capsules left over from Red Cross parcels received years earlier and
these were highly prized because biting into them released an acid which
temporarily cut the cotton taste in one's mouth even though they really did
nothing to alleviate the dehydration.

The only group which did not suffer greatly during this period was the small
detail assigned to cooking duties as they were the only ones allowed on deck
and, by the nature of their duties, had no trouble getting food and water.
However, they also suffered the first casualty in the person of a major of
engineers who dove over the side to try to swim to shore but was shot to death
by a row-boat patrol.

Finally, we again got under .ay which, at least, made it cooler although it did
not help the water ration. The next day, after about 12 days on the ship and
with roughly half the prisoners on the verge of madness, we arrived - at Pier 7
in Manila. In retrospect, I can only account for this maneuver on the basis that
our vessel was hiding out while Admiral Halsey's carrier airplanes, which had
conducted the raid on Manila, were operating in the area between the Philippines
and Formosa.

In Manila we took on supplies and the water ration was temporarily increased
but, after sailing, they were again decreased. This time after clearing Manila
Bay, we headed due north with the weather gradually getting cooler. From the
cooking detail on deck we learned we were traveling in a convoy of about 18
vessels escorted by two destroyers. Several days out of Manila, in the middle of
the night, we finally had some luck in the form of a very heavy rain. My own
group had remained in relatively good shape mainly through the process of
keeping our heads and moving as little as possible. Thus when the rain came we
were able, by strength and teamwork, to fill, not only our stomachs, but also
every available container with water. After that, thirst was no longer a problem
and, even though the pangs of hunger set in, that was a relatively minor
discomfort.

The end came suddenly. It was late afternoon, October 21st. 1944, and we knew
from the guards that we were due to arrive in Formosa the next day. A pounding
of feet on the deck above us, distant explosions, and the sharp crack of our
ship's guns, made us realize something was up. A tremendous crash, which filled
the air in the hold with dust and rust, told us that we had been hit. Several
months previously a ship coming from Singapore with a load of bauxite and
British and Dutch prisoners had been torpedoed off the Philippines and the few
survivors had been brought into our camp on Luzon. They reported that their ship
had gone down like a stone and most of the prisoners had been trapped below
decks. With this in mind, there was a wild rush for the center of the hold to
avoid being caught beneath the deck.

At this point, my luck began to tick. A day or so previously, because of the
cooler weather, I had changed into a pair of coveralls but, when the commotion
started. I decided that this was improper attire for swimming and, when the
torpedo hit, I was busy trying to get out of the coveralls and into a pair of
shorts made from a shelter half. Thus, because of the cramped conditions, I was
unable to head for the center of the hold and, by the time the dust had settled
and I had made my change of clothing, daylight was pouring into the side of the
ship. Soon I discovered that, even though the torpedo had hit on the starboard
side in the empty No. 3 hold, the force had knocked off the plate to which the
bulkhead between No.2 and No.3 was butted. One member of our group was still
next to me and we had our usual argument; in this case about the propriety of
evacuating our ship or staying with her. We had argued for years - before the
war, during the war months and during the prison camp years - but this was our
last argument because, again as usual, we disagreed and I dropped into the water
with a life jacket in my hand while he elected to stay with the ship. I never
saw him again.

It was an overcast day with a fairly stiff breeze and waves running 10-12 feet
high. The waves and wind carried us by the sinking ship and shortly I was with a
group of about 50 - mostly Americans but with some Japanese - who had all
abandoned ship at an early stage. From one of the guards, we found out that our
vessel had been hit by a submarine rather than an airplane.

Soon one of the convoying destroyers appeared and started picking up the
Japanese from the water. Several of us Americans tried to board her, via the eye
bolts on her side, but were driven off - in my case with a bucket to the head.
By this time night was not far off and things began to look extremely dim - so
much so that I was resigned to death and mostly curious about the mechanics of
how it would arrive.

It was then that I spotted the two lifeboats with which our ship had been
equipped and which had been used by most of the Japanese to transfer to the
destroyer. Both were empty of people but one was high in the water and being
rapidly blown away from the scene. However, the other one was low in the water
and was moving down-wind much more slowly. Calling to the others around me, I
set off after her. After a few strokes, I realized that I would never catch her
with the hindrance of my life jacket so I threw the jacket off and, thanks to
that and to having been a good swimmer since childhood, I was able to catch her
just at dark. None of the others around me in the water had made it.

In the ocean I had felt no cold but now, hunched on the small stern deck of this
lifeboat filled with water (it was the non-sinkable type), in the wind and
intermittently soaked by waves, it was extremely chilly, even though we were not
too far north. At first, I could hear voices around me and I would yell to show
my position but, gradually, the voices died away.

Time was difficult to determine but some hours after dark my luck again returned
in an extraordinary form. In what seemed to be a spot just off the bow, a voice
started shouting and, as I crawled cautiously along the gunnel to get to the bow
in order to guide the voice to the boat and help him aboard, a large wooden box
with a lid on it bumped the side. As the box was much too large to be handled, I
opened the lid and found the box full of canvas. Thinking only of something to
protect me from the wind and water, I grabbed a corner of what later turned out
to be a sail and gradually payed it into the boat as the latter and the box
separated. By this time, the voice had gone off into the dark only to approach
again in a half hour or so and soon I was helping my first companion into the
boat. Several hours later another was guided to and helped into the boat.

The night seemed interminable and, as dawn broke to a clear day, we were cold,
wet, stiff and tired. Also, with dawn two more survivors appeared on a bamboo
raft and were soon aboard to complete our contingent of five. From them we
learned that the ship had stayed afloat for a number of hours after the
torpedoing and many of the prisoners had decided to go down with her.
Apparently, all of the four that joined me had hung on to something which
floated faster than and caught up with the lifeboat although, what with waves
and being so close to the surface of the water, our range of vision was very
limited and somebody only a few hundred yards away would have remained unseen.

Our first step was to get organized and bail out the boat. Using hands and
abandoned pieces of clothing, the bailing appeared at first to be accomplishing
nothing but, as the freeboard gradually increased, the influx of water decreased
and by mid-morning we were in a practically dry boat, lying broadside to the
waves and rolling madly. The sun shone brightly so that we were soon dry and
warmed from our unpleasant night.

It was then time to take inventory. Under the stern deck, we found a large,
sealed can of dry biscuits so our food supply was ample. Although the Japanese
had knocked the bungs out of the two water barrels, there was sufficient fresh
water left in them for several days on a rationed basis and we could go a number
of days beyond that without water. Lashed to the bottom of the boat were a mast,
boom and tiller. The all-important sail, which I had pulled into the boat, was
equipped with enough rope for a halyard to raise it up the mast and for a main
sheet. A variety of clothing, knotted together, would have to be used for back
and side stays. Finally, as the only one with sailing experience, I
automatically took over command. Knowing roughly where we were at the time of
the sinking, being able to visualize the coast of China as running approximately
north northeast in these latitudes and having a good idea of the wind direction
from the rising sun, it was easy to decide on a rough course which would take us
to China.

With the makeshift stays dangling and the main halyard reeved through the block
at the top, we attempted to step the mast. With the rolling of the boat and our
own weakness, it was a difficult task, but we almost had the mast in place when
one of my companions saw what appeared to be a warship in the distance. We
immediately unstepped the mast - to avoid being sighted - and lay down on the
floorboards on the bottom of the boat. The Japanese destroyer, as it turned out
to be, continued to approach us until it hove to several hundred yards away. At
this point, she could see us and we could see her quite plainly because the
lifeboat, lying broadside to the waves, displayed her insides every time she
rose on a swell. We could only visualize two possibilities; either we would be
taken prisoners again, or we would be machine gunned along with the lifeboat. In
either case, we decided we wanted to meet our fate with something in our
stomachs so we broke open the rations and started to eat, still lying in the
bottom of the boat. Strangely enough, I do not believe any of us felt any fear.
We had been through too much and were relatively indifferent to what happened
next.

As we lay there eating and watching the men on the destroyer inspect us through
their binoculars, there was a sudden flurry of activity, a jingle of engine
bells, and the destroyer took off towards the horizon at a good rate of speed.
As soon as she was out of sight, we lost little time in getting up the mast and
raising the sail. Although in our first attempt the lateen-type sail was
reversed, we were able to correct it without removing the mast and once we were
under way, the movement of the boat was quite comfortable compared to the
previous rolling when we were parallel to the seas. By this time, it was early
afternoon and, with a stiff breeze and the waves to push us, I estimate we were
making a good four to five knots.

When night fell, the North Star was clearly visible and gave me a good
navigational check. I determined that the wind was blowing almost due west, so
by heading approximately northwest by west, we not only had a good sailing
position but were approaching the China coast almost perpendicularly. However,
despite the fact that we were dry and not uncomfortable physically, that night
was a terror, particularly for me. There was a lot of phosphorescence in the
water and in my imagination, probably brought on by mental strain and lack of
sleep, I kept seeing lights and hearing the familiar voices of my friends on the
ship calling my name and screaming for help. Twice I turned over the tiller to
one of my companions and tried to get some sleep but both times, through
inexperience, he allowed the boat to jibe almost ripping out the mast. After
those experiences, there was nothing left to do but carry on myself because the
idea of lying to never crossed our minds. When dawn broke it was like coming
back to life again.

The next day was again bright and clear and with the breeze continuing we made
good progress. Water was rationed out and we continued nibbling at the dry
biscuits. No vessels were sighted and only one plane passed high above us. We
talked optimistically about procedures once we were ashore and the constant,
bubbling wake of our boat kept us in a good mood.

Towards late afternoon, we could see a rough coast line dead ahead and, as we
came nearer, we could see junks fishing in pairs between us and the coast. After
some discussion, in which luckily I was outvoted, it was decided to land on one
of the junks rather than attempt to reach the coast proper where there was
considerable surf. Accordingly, we pulled up rather smartly, considering the
maneuverability of our craft, to the side of a good-sized junk.

As we approached this vessel, only three or four crewmen were visible on deck
but, the minute we threw one of them a line, Chinese seemed to boil out of its
innards. We were handed bodily up onto the deck and a mob attacked the lifeboat
ripping everything out of it until only the steel shell was left. A hole was
punched in this shell and our craft sank quickly without a trace.

All of this took but a few minutes and we were then led to the stern and
presented to a heavy, mustachioed gentleman with an air of authority who, as we
found out later, was the captain. Immediately, language became a problem. None
of us spoke any Chinese and, although 1 knew a good bit of Japanese, neither
that language, nor English, provided any help. Then the captain produced a
greasy piece of paper and the stub of a pencil. At first, I tried to depict our
ship being torpedoed but obviously my artistic abilities and my command of sign
language were unequal to my message so 1 turned over the paper, drew a Japanese
flag and then spat on it. Smiles and comments went through the audience pressed
around us and the captain hastened to add his saliva to mine. We felt we had it
made.

By that time, the women, and there were a number on board as well as children,
had prepared us a meal of rice and several varieties of fish. Everything was
boiled and the rice was soupy, but we think this was by design in view of our
physical conditions. We were then taken below where the passageways and
compartments were so low that we could only crawl or sit. There we were each
given a bucket of hot water and a rag and urged by sign language to wash
ourselves. Feeling much better and cleaner with all the salt removed, we
returned to deck where night had fallen and, by the light of the fishing
torches, we were served another meal. This time the rice was dry, the fish was
fried and the taste was delicious.

After being furnished with odd garments to help keep us warm, we were shown a
spot on the slanting stern deck where we could lie down. None of us had any
trouble going to sleep, but the combination of the movement of the junk and the
pitch of the deck caused the ones higher up to gradually slide down onto the
lowest one. Approximately once every hour we would become so entangled that we
would have to get up and rearrange ourselves. Nevertheless, we awoke feeling
much better and ready to go.

After breakfast - of rice and fish - the captain produced a straight razor and
indicated we were to shave - for what reason we did not know. With the condition
of the razor and no soap, the operation was a bit painful and bloody but
everything seemed good to us that morning. We were then instructed to stay on
deck but out of sight of shore watchers while the junk weighed anchor and sailed
past some islands into a small bay where we again anchored at the mouth of a
little river. There were a number of junks at the mooring and many visitors came
to inspect us. After returning the borrowed garments and clad once again in only
our shorts, we proceeded by sampan several miles up the river to a good-sized
village. On the landing stage was an armed, uniformed soldier whose appearance
greatly alarmed one of my companions but, when we approached closely enough, I
recognized his cap badge as the chrysanthemum of Nationalist China and was able
to reassure the worried one.

We were taken into the town and into a small store where most of the population
attempted and apparently succeeded in entering with us. Everything was very
jolly except the inability to communicate and the numerous small boys who
wandered around underneath and apparently were fascinated by the hairs on our
legs because they kept pulling them - either to get a souvenir, or to find out
if they were real. After a while, the crowd parted and we were confronted with a
young Chinese who spoke excellent English. He questioned us in detail and
relayed each of our answers to the crowd in Chinese and they "ohed", "ahed", and
"hissed", depending on the answer. We in turn bombarded him with questions and
received the following information.

We were in a town named Kitchioh midway between Hong Kong and Swatow. We were in
a zone controlled by Chunking even though it was isolated from the interior by
Japanese lines and some of the offshore islands were occupied by Japanese
garrisons.

The commanding general of the zone had been informed of our arrival and was
expected to arrive in the village that same evening.  We also found out that our
English-speaking friend had been raised in Singapore and thus his command of the
language. From that time on, we were always accompanied by an interpreter which
made things a lot easier.

Just before dark, the general arrived on foot accompanied by an armed retinue
including an American. The general was relatively young, dapper and quite
affable, but he spoke little English and most of our conversation was with the
American. He was a corporal from 14th Air Force mostly concerned with weather
information which he radioed back to his headquarters in Kunming. Thus he was
able, at the appointed radio time, to report our arrival and our names to 14th
Air Force. He also told us that he had to accompany the general on an inspection
tour but that we would see them both in a few days at a larger town further
inland.

That night we were treated to the first of a number of "banquets" which
enlivened our short stay with the Chinese. We must have presented an incongruous
sight dressed only in shorts and our bodies covered with sores as we partook
fully of the wonderful food and "kan-peid" (bottoms up) in Chinese rice wine.
Luckily, in the banquets we attended, the food and the wine were served together
and there was no staying around after both were finished. Although feeling no
pain, we were ready for sleep when the dinner ended. A minor crisis arose when
it was discovered that no quarters had been provided for us, but we were soon
equipped with a quilt, a block of wood for a pillow, and bedded down in the
village school where we enjoyed our first uninterrupted sleep in many nights.

We woke the next morning to the sound of many childish voices and discovered we
were under close observation by hundreds of small black eyes. The children,
clean and neatly dressed, were agog with excitement although I'm sure we didn't
present a very appetizing sight with our emaciated bodies, our shaved heads, our
dirty shorts and our bleary eyes. After a light breakfast of tea and soft rice,
we soon found we were on the schedule for the morning’s activities. After all
there were five of us so what could be more natural than a basketball game
between the school team and the visitors. However, the visitors were extremely
reluctant to cooperate and finally a compromise was reached whereby we would
shoot baskets against the locals. Although the audience was obviously
disappointed, they were courteous enough to clap loudly and rhythmically, with
due prompting from the teachers, every time that one of us was lucky enough to
find the basket with the ball.

This was hardly what we had imagined freedom would be like, but we were grateful
and trying our limited best when the "game” was rudely interrupted by the news
that the Japanese on an off-shore island had had word of our presence and were
coming to town to investigate. True, or not true, we didn't take time to find
out and, having no belongings, mobilized rapidly and set off on foot, with two
unarmed escorts and our interpreter in the direction in which we were pointed.
Initially, despite our physical conditions, we assumed a good lead over our
escort, who were apparently either better informed or less concerned about the
Japanese, but gradually we settled down to a slower, more steady pace.

All day we walked along trails in the hot sun threading our way through
cultivated fields. Luckily, because we were still not in top physical condition,
the terrain was relatively flat although low mountains were not far away to our
right, or to the northeast. There were people working in the fields but little
traffic on the trails which were too narrow for cars or trucks. Occasionally, we
would meet convoys of coolies carrying cargo on their yo-yo poles and small
groups of travelers on unknown business. Each encounter would provoke a flood of
conversation with our escort and the looks in our direction gave us little doubt
as to the subject. However, spurred on by the thoughts of the Japanese behind us
and unable to participate verbally, we maintained our pace so that the escort
would have to run to catch up.

Approximately every three miles, or 10 Chinese li, along our route we would come
to a group of vendors housed in a sort of stone gatehouse through which the
trail passed. There we would halt and, with the encouragement of our escorts,
eat everything we could lay our hands on - mostly hard-boiled eggs, rice cakes,
fried fish, persimmons and oranges This went on all day - walk three miles, eat
practically a full meal, walk another three miles and eat another meal. Our main
problem, foodwise, was with one of our group who couldn't hold his meals between
stopovers. On the lifeboat, he had found some pills which he decided would help
him combat sea-sickness but, apparently, they only made it worse. Now that he
was on land either the pills or a form of dysentery, was working on him because
he spent a good bit of his time and ours in the fields beside the trail.
However, despite our protests, by the time we reached the next stop he was ready
to eat with the best of us and then would lose it again on the march.

With the heat and the continuous walking, thirst was a problem which took a
little solving. Our escort would not permit us to drink raw water so at the
stopovers we had a choice of hot tea or hot water - both served in porcelain,
jigger-sized cups and both so hot that they could only be sipped. The answer was
to order ten cups of water at one time. As soon as the first one could be
swallowed, the drinker would start down the line while the hot water vendor
would follow behind filling the empty cups. In this way, although a slow
process, our thirsts were kept within bounds.

All along the road the people were curious but friendly and it was apparent that
we were in an area relatively untouched by the Japanese and loyal to the central
government. From later experience, it now appears to me that the further removed
the people from the seat of government, the less they resented it. That day and
afterwards our escorts were scrupulous in paying for all purchases incurred by
themselves and us.

That night, well after dark, we reached another, somewhat larger town and were
met at the town gate by a band and a procession who had obviously been waiting
for several hours. To the sound of music we were escorted to a small but clean
guesthouse where we were allowed to wash up briefly before being taken to the
inevitable banquet. Despite the fact that we had been eating all day, we
performed well at the dinner table and handled our share of the toasts. After
the party, sleep came like a flash but during the middle of the night I had to
get up and found that both of my thighs were so charley-horsed that I couldn't
walk. The long day’s exercise, after the confinement on the ship, had done its
job.

The next morning, my companions were in as bad a shape as I was so we thought it
would be a good idea if we rested up for a few days where we were. Our escort
thought differently because they had orders to get us to the general's
headquarters by evening. So, after a short delay to arrange for the equipment,
we set forth in sedan chairs. These consisted of light, uncovered bamboo chairs
fastened to two long bamboo poles. The bearers, short, stocky men with
tremendous calves, placed themselves for and aft, picked up the poles and set
off at a rapid jog which they maintained for the three miles between gatehouses
where they would rest for ten or fifteen minutes and then take off again. The
occupant had a choice of letting his legs dangle or draping them over the poles
with the latter being more elegant and comfortable. At some point during the
previous evening, I had been given a cigar and now I lit it, leaned back, put my
feet up on the poles and felt God was in his heaven and all was well with the
world. Altogether it was a most enjoyable day and our large meals at three-mile
intervals did nothing to detract from it.

In the late afternoon, we reached Hoifung. a still larger town, where we were
welcomed by the general and his staff, including the American corporal. Here we
rested for three days and were outfitted with clothes consisting of a pair of
sandals, light blue-denim blouse and trousers and a conical straw hat. From a
distance, we looked like typical Chinese peasants and felt very comfortable in
the loose garments.

We also embarked on a round of banquets given by the general, the mayor and
certain unidentified individuals. We started to build back our weights and the
puffiness of beriberi and the numerous skin sores began to disappear. When we
first arrived in China, our skins would break from the slightest impact and the
wound would become infected so I remember well the first time I hit my leg
sharply against a table and nothing happened. Rightly, or wrongly, we ascribed
our improvement to the numerous eggs we had eaten and continued to eat.

My stiff leg muscles continued to bother me until I was able to persuade the
general that what I needed was a massage. Envisioning a smooth and gentle
kneading of the muscles, I was somewhat taken aback by what followed. A small,
wiry man, of indeterminate but obviously mature years, came into my room,
motioned me to undress and lie on the bed and then proceeded to sit on me while
he administered a rapid, two-handed chop, using the edges of his hands as
striking surfaces, to practically all portions of my body. He went on steadily
for about an hour stopping only to shift his position on top of me or to get me
to roll over. He finished off by cracking each toe and finger, as well as my
neck and then departed without a word having been spoken. Every moment was sheer
agony but it must have helped because the next day only a slight stiffness
remained.

On the fourth day, we started off again - this time towards the interior and
with a new method of transportation. Each of our party was provided with a
bicycle and a man to peddle it while we sat behind on luggage racks with our
feet on short extensions of the rear axle. Compared to the sedan chairs, the
bicycles were relatively fast and exceedingly uncomfortable because, no matter
how one sat, in a few minutes it was wrong. We wound through fertile, green
valleys dotted with numerous walled villages which, from a distance, looked like
castles in Europe. We passed through small towns loud with high, Oriental music
and busy crowds. Occasionally, we would come to a mountain pass too steep for
our motive power so coolies would be engaged to carry the bicycles, two to a man
on each end of a yo-yo pole, over the pass while our group hiked it.

With high spirits and sore rear ends, we kept up a good pace for two days until
we reached Hingning, a large city well back from the coast. At that point, we
were in one of our moods where we refused to be subjected to the bicycle torture
racks and were walking down a sort of avenue when we came upon a crowd gathered
around some focal point. Using the dispersionary tactics that were the despair
of our escorts, we infiltrated the mob and obtained choice positions in the
front or inner row. There was a U. S. Army jeep with three G.I.’s intent on
something under the opened hood.

“What’s the matter, Mac?”, I said, and one soldier turned around, looked
casually at the crowd of blue-clad figures and replied, "Just don’t crowd us,
pal." He had returned to his study of the jeep motor before my original English
words penetrated his conscious; then came the classical double-take.

We arrived in Washington, D. C. on December 1, 1944, via North Africa and the
Atlantic, but it was mid-February before word was received from the Japanese
through the Red Cross in Geneva that our ship had been sunk with no POW
survivors. I saw the list with our names along with the rest - close friends,
acquaintances, enemies and strangers.
